[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm William Henry, and
this is "Ascension Keepers."
The 11th through
13th centuries may
be called the
Gnostic Renaissance
in Europe, especially France.
They were marked by an
effervescent resurgence
of spiritual movements of
clearly gnostic nature.
It was as if the as Essene soul
group reincarnated en masse.
Foremost among our ascension
keepers during this time
were the Cathar mystics
who called themselves
the Albigenses after the town
of Albi in southern France
where they were centered.
They were also known as
the Good Christians or Bon,
which is French for good.
Like the Essenes,
the Cathars are
sought to return to our Edenic
state, our primordial state
as light beings before the fall.
Their Italian name, Cathari,
is from the Greek root
signifying the pure ones.
The Cathars were male
and female ascetics
who claimed knowledge of how
to perfect the human body
into a more pure or
illumined state of being
and ascend to the Celestial
City of the Essenes.
They walked away from
the world in order
to follow Christ and
Mary, both the mother Mary
and the Magdalene, in their
transfiguration and ascension
into an angelic or
spiritualized body
and enter the heavenly
realm, a dimension inhabited
by blessed spiritual beings.
Having traveled to their home in
the Languedoc region of France
over a dozen times
since 1998, I can
tell you there's a palpable
spiritual essence that
is present in this holy land.
I find this to be true
of any sacred place
where masses of humans have been
doing intense spiritual work.
But it's especially true here.
It's a place of rugged,
spiritual beauty,
mountainous peaks that jut
from the blanket of vineyards
and evergreens.
And atop these
peaks, the Cathars
built astounding castles.
In my opinion, they symbolize
both the Garden of Eden
and the Celestial
City of the Essenes.
Caribou, for example,
and Puialaurens,
these were sun chambers
of these mystics.
And I mean that literally.
The latest research
shows that Cathars
constructed these places as
gateways or portals to heaven.
Montsegur has been
called the grail castle
and the last refuge
of the Cathars.
According to Cathar belief,
one object of earth life
was to make over or
perfect the human body
as a pure and worthy vehicle
for the light of the Holy Spirit
and the love of Christ.
Those who accomplished this
were known to the Cathars
as the perfecti,
the perfected ones.
Following in the
footsteps of the Essenes,
who called themselves the
men of perfect holiness
who were trying to build
a house of perfection,
both in their body and
in their community,
the Cathars can be thought of
as reincarnations of the Essenes
in more than just their beliefs
and spiritual practices.
During the Cathars era, the
mainstream Roman Catholic
church was still
finding its way.
Reading the Bible,
even in Latin,
was forbidden by the Church,
which sought total authority
and control.
The Cathars, who freely
taught the way of love,
represented unwanted
competition,
particularly as they claimed
their brand of Christianity
was original to Christ,
originating with the Essenes,
and predated Rome's intercept
of Jesus's teaching.
As Catharism appealed to the
nobility of southern France,
who reigned from a super-wealthy
kingdom in nearby Toulouse,
the Church coveted
the Cathar wealth.
In a move to
consolidate its power,
in the early 12th
century, the Roman church
launched the
Albigensian Crusade,
an inquisition to
hunt and eradicate
the Catholic heretics.
Hundreds of thousands of
men, women, and children
Cathars and other citizens
of the Languedoc region
of southern France were
exterminated in mass burnings
and slaughtering at
the hands of the church
in the first European
genocide in order
to eradicate the teachings
of the perfect ones,
of the Essenes, of Jesus.
Just like the Roman
Empire, or the children
of darkness as the
Essenes called them,
these ascension keepers
were wiped out en masse
by a desperate opposition.
In the Languedoc,
the Cathars sought
to connect with Jesus
as an angel of light who
had entered human affairs to
deliver a spiritual technology
for escaping Earth and to
cross into the kingdom of light
via the Tree of Life.
For the Cathars,
Christ was an emissary
of the light sent into the world
to lead humanity back to God.
The church that
formed around it was
known as amour, or love,
the church of love,
which was opposed by
the Church of Roma.
The Cathars believed
each individual possessed
two parts, one, a
spark of divine light
that was trapped in a
garment of earthly flesh.
Some believed the
purpose of this
was to utilize our body as
some sort of an energy device
for harvesting some form of
energy off of our bodies.
Again, it's a belief that
goes all the way back,
even into the Sumerian
times of our bodies
originating from a divine
place and somehow being trapped
into the material realm.
The other aspect of ourselves,
our true self they refer to it,
dwells in heaven and is
the guide and guardian
of our earthly part.
The Cathars devised
the Consolamentum,
a practice that brings the
two parts back together
in a mystical marriage that
allows the imprisoned earth
spirit to escape or ascend
to heaven under the guidance
of the heavenly counterpart.
In the text, this return
is described as an ascent
through seven levels.
Our divine spark, our
souls, we're told,
once dwelled in heaven
in glorified light bodies
or celestial bodies that
were left behind in heaven.
In effect, we're
all fallen angels.
Our earthly purpose
is to realize
our spiritual predicament
and to reverse the fall,
uniting the earthly spark
and the glorified light body.
The body of the
perfected ones was
said to have become
transmaterial or semi-angelic,
fulfilling the teaching
of the Gospel of Luke.
According to the
Cathars, the mission
of the perfecti, or
the perfect ones,
was to assist and
show others the way
to attain their angelic status,
release their divine spark
from the cycle of
earthly incarnation,
and to return to the
glorified light body.
As part of their ascension
plan, the Cathar perfect ones
performed a ceremony
called the Consolamentum,
a spiritual baptism in
which Christ transmits
the Holy Spirit or the holy fire
to the rank and file Cathars.
During this ceremony, which
evolved from Pentecost which
occurred 50 days after
Christ's ascension
when he sent a fire, frequency,
or vibration of the Holy Spirit
to the Disciples, this spirit
would descend from heaven
and transform the ordinary
Cathars into a perfect one.
Good Christian was the
term used by the Cathars
to describe those
who have received
the Consolamentum or the
fire, frequency, or vibration
of the Holy Spirit.
They claimed that this frequency
or vibration was transmitted
shoulder to shoulder
from the time of Christ
to the time of the Cathars
in a continuous line
of transmission.
And those who received
the Consolamentum
could then pass it on to others.
The Consolamentum
removed all sin
and restored the glorious
or angelic light body
the garment of immortality.
To the Cathars,
a consoled person
is an angel in the flesh.
Obviously, receiving
Consolamentum
was similar but not
identical to what
the Essenes had in mind
with their transformation
into an angel and was
an extreme life-changer.
Once it was received, there
were strict prohibitions
against having sex,
eating meat, and taking
the life of any creature.
Fasting and
vegetarian diets were
required to maintain the
elevated frequency of the body.
And this is why
Consolamentum was usually
taken by the catheters
at an advanced age.
The Consolamentum has been
referred to as the transmission
of the book and the prayer.
The Cathars had only one
prayer, the Our Father.
Our father, which art in
Heaven, hallowed be Thy name.
Thy kingdom come.
Thy will be done in
Earth as it is in Heaven.
Give us this day
our daily bread.
And forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil.
For Thine is the Kingdom, the
power, and the glory forever
and ever.
Amen.
This was the only
prayer taught by Jesus
and is revered as the
prayer spoken by the angels
before the sapphire
throne of Christ.
It was sacred to the
Cathars and could only
be said by the consoled or those
who had begun the Consolamentum
initiation.
However, the Cathars
altered the Lord's Prayer
in a profound way.
Instead of saying, "Give us
this day our daily bread,"
the Cathars said, "Bread
beyond substance."
This is a reference to the
star food or food of the angels
that we see falling around Mary
in the images of Pentecost.
It appears that the attunement
the Consolamentum provided
enabled those initiates
to perceive and enjoy
what is thought of as this
higher dimensional substance.
Moses manifested this
otherworldly substance,
this star food, with his rod
or wand, which we are told
was made from a branch that
grew from the Tree of Knowledge
in Eden.
The second aspect of the
Consolamentum is the book.
This is widely assumed
to be the Bible.
However, other alternatives
are possible and suggested.
Its claimed the
Cathars possessed
the true secret teaching of
Jesus, one composed of symbols
and known as the Book of Love.
This mysterious
manuscript is attributed
to Jesus, who gave
it or transmitted it
to John the Divine.
It was transmitted
through the centuries
until the Knights Templar
and the Cathars adopted it.
In Christian art, we see
John receiving a download
from Christ, who stands on top
of a holy mountain and points
to Mary, who is seated
on a disk of light,
rising out of the clouds and
holding the Christ child.
A winged serpent being,
a Seraphim, observes.
The Book of Love
was the foundation
of the Cathars Church
of Love or Church
of a Amour, which is the reverse
of Roma, the Church of Rome.
The existence of this
lost or hidden gospel
was revealed when the
Catholic church subjected
the Cathars and the
Knights Templar to torture.
Its contents were
a secret skill,
said to grant one the ability
to control the forces of nature
and to transform ordinary
human blood into that
of the wise, holy, and
pure blood of Christ.
There are several theories
concerning how the book of love
came to France and
to the Cathars.
One theory says an unknown
master brought the Book of Love
to the Cathars from the East,
where stories of meditation,
soul travel, and
metamorphosis originate,
a man who is
described in a peasant
story to the
Inquisition tribunal
as having a strange persuasive
power, the feature of amour,
and a strange blue
light around him.
In his book "Crusade
against the Grail,"
the German mythologist Otto
Rahn said the laws of Minne,
the laws of love, were given
to the first troubadour
by a hawk that sat on a
branch of a golden oak tree.
Many of the troubadours
were Cathars.
The Egyptian god Horus
that reincarnated Osiris,
the god of resurrection,
was represented by the hawk
and is one of the most
famous gods of ancient Egypt.
Horus was the god of the sky,
a symbol of divine kingship.
He could take human
shape with a falcon head.
We note that he has a
winged serpent symbol
of the Seraphim on his arm.
Another theory says
the Book of Love
was brought to the Catholics by
Papa Nicetas, the Bogomil saint
who traveled from his
home in Constantinople
to the Languedoc, France in
1167 for the first official
congress of the heads
of the Cathars church.
He gave them the book, also
known as the Book of Nicetas,
or the Book of Seven Seals.
The Bogomils were a Gnostic
sect founded in the 10th century
and headquartered in Macedonia
who called for a return
to early or original
Christianity.
They were heavily influenced
by the mysticism of Manichaeism
and the ancient Iranian
Zoroastrianism and Ahura Mazda.
In fact, the Bogomils are
followers of Mani, the Persian
Gnostic we discussed earlier.
As a young man, Mani
lived in a community
of Jewish Christian
Baptists who are closely
associated with the Ebionites
but who decided to break away.
The Ebionites were founded by
an important but largely unknown
figure in the early history
of Christianity, James
the Righteous, or James
the Just, the younger
brother of Jesus who
was the first bishop
or archbishop of the Jerusalem
church in the decades
after the Resurrection
and ascension of Jesus.
Scholars say the Ebionites
left Jerusalem in 70 AD
after the destruction of
the Temple of Solomon.
And they made their way
to Italy and Macedonia.
Eusebius quotes from a now lost
work of Clement of Alexandria
called "Hyposposes."
James the Righteous,
John, and Peter
were entrusted by the Lord
after His Resurrection
with the higher knowledge.
And they imparted it
to the other apostles,
and the other apostles to the
70, one of whom was Barnabas.
The "Apocryphon of James,"
the lone surviving copy
of which was found in the
Gnostic Nag Hammadi Library
in Egypt and which
may have been written
in Egypt in the third century,
tells the Ebionite story
of Jesus eating bread with James
after the Resurrection, which
indicates that the
Ebionites very much believed
in a physical
Resurrection for Jesus.
With the discovery of
the Dead Sea Scrolls,
biblical scholars
and theologians
realized for the first time
that the true foundation
of the teachings of Jesus
was Jewish Essene or Ebionite
gnosticism.
In addition to James,
the original disciples
and other family members,
known as the Desposyni,
meaning of or
belonging to the Lord,
composed the original Jerusalem
church, as it was also known.
And despite the fact that
Ebionite Christianity,
the Jerusalem church,
is the religion created
by Jesus's family and
those who knew him,
it's still considered
a heresy to this day.
Christian scholars are
insistent that the Ebionite
had a secret book.
Mohammed knew of the
Ebionite, calling them
the people of Sabah in
the Quran, and their book,
calling the Ebionites
the People of the Book.
As many considered the Ebionites
the same as the Nazarenes
and the Essenes, with
the Cathar Book of Love,
we could be dealing with
a lost Essene scroll.
Another name for the Ebionite
Essenes is the Elchasaites.
Elchasai is called
the Apostle of Light.
And this figure, as
we discussed earlier,
is successively reincarnating.
His alternate name is Alexei.
Both forms of the name
go back to the Aramaic,
which Epiphanius
translates as hidden power.
In the "Revelation of Elchasai,"
Gerald P. Luttikhuizen
refers to a book of Elchasai
as a Christian writing.
In fact, it is said
to derive from Christ
and is intended
to be a supplement
to Christian teaching.
This book is now lost to us.
But scholars are attempting
to reconstruct it.
In "God kings of
Europe, the Descendants
of Jesus Traced
through the Odonic,"
Hugh Montgomery tells us that
Buddha was another incarnation
of this Apostle of Light.
So is Jesus.
James the righteous followed.
And 100 years after Jesus,
the Apostle of Light
incarnated as Elchasai.
He is likely the same
as the mighty angel
who gave John the book to eat
in the Book of Revelation.
This may be one reason why
this lost book cannot be found.
It was consumed.
But another way
of looking at this
is that this is not
a literal experience.
Even though we're told the book
was set to taste like honey,
this could be an
allegorical term
that says the person embodied
or began to live this teaching.
They consumed it and
actually became it.
Montgomery tells the
Elchasaites were also called
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
which means shortcut,
because they possessed
a shortcut to God.
He says they were also known
as Cathari, from which we
get the term Cathar.
Montgomery rightly
connects the Cathars
to the Bogomils,
who, once again, can
be traced through Manichaeism
to the Ebionites to the Essenes.
The Cologne Mani-Codex,
which is dated
from the 4th century
of the current era,
describes the parents of Mani,
the founder of Manichaeism,
as followers of the prophet
Elchasaous, which scholars
have identified with Elchasai.
And the Book of Hidden
Power is supposed
to have been given
to the Elchasaites
by two angels called
the Son of God,
or watchers, and
the Holy Spirit.
So is there a connection?
Is the Book of
Love of the Cathars
and the Book of Hidden
Power of the Elchasaites
and the Ebionites the same book?
The Book of Love is strikingly
similar to the secret book
of the Ebionites and
firmly places the Cathars
in our timeline of
ascension keepers.
So what is the hidden
power this book transmits?
We know that although Jesus
taught His ordinary followers
by scripture, parable, myth, and
precept, Luke's gospel tells us
that to his inner
circle of disciples,
he transmitted, meaning beamed
or gifted, spiritual power
directly and passed
on his secrets
so that they could
carry on his work.
This happened at
the Last Supper.
When Jesus had called the 12
together the 12 disciples,
he gave them power and authority
to drive out all demons
and to cure diseases.
And he sent them out to
proclaim the Kingdom of God
and to heal the sick.
He told them, take nothing for
the journey, no staff, no bag,
no bread, no money,
no extra shirt.
Whatever house you
enter, stay there
until you leave that town.
And if people don't welcome
you, leave their town,
and shake the dust off your
feet as testimony against them.
So they set out and went
from village to village,
proclaiming the good news and
healing people everywhere,
so says the Gospel of Luke.
So let's now turn to a
contemporary of the Cathars
who scholars believe not only
received the Consolamentum
but also left us a roadmap
for doing so, Dante.
Dante's "Divine Comedy" is
about the soul's journey to God
and how he changed his earthly
flesh into celestial flesh,
prompting the first use
of the word transhuman.
Dante's works, the "Paradisio"
and "The Divine Comedy"
are actually a mind
map for ascension.
The Italian genius Dante studied
at Florence's Santa Maria
Novella inside the
Spanish chapel.
The old chapter house
of the monastery
shows the white robed chosen
ones entering the gate
to the high mountain, Scion.
Dante conceives of purgatory
as an island with a mountain
divided into three parts.
Ante-purgatory is a sort
of waiting area where
souls wait to enter purgatory.
Their goal is to get past
the angel who is guarding
the closed door to purgatory.
We note here in this
painting that it
has seven terraces which
correspond with the seven
deadly sins.
The third part, the
top, is Eden at the apex
of this cosmic mountain.
As the idea of a
waiting room for souls
is not part of
Christian theology,
scholars propose that Dante is
drawing from another tradition
in telling his story.
He's actually mapping out
the Cathar Consolamentum.
And in his ascension
journey, Dante
receives the first part of
the Cathar Consolamentum.
And then, to mark his invitation
into the second phase,
he goes through the closed door.
Next, exactly as in
the Cathar sacrament,
Dante tells of acquiring
a prayer and a book.
The prayer, again,
is the Lord's supper.
And the book, we
are led to believe,
is the Book of Hidden
Power, the Book of Love.
Upon entering the door,
Dante sees a marble rock
with inscriptions.
This corresponds with the
heavenly tablet or book
given to the
initiate by the gods
or the mighty angels on
the path of ascension.
Dante calls the writing on
the rock visible language,
which suggests symbols.
Next, Dante hears souls
singing the Our Father, again,
the only Cathar
prayer and the one
said to be sung by angels
at the throne of Christ.
Now Dante is prepared to
traverse the seven levels,
or circuits, of Paradise.
And finally, he
reaches Eden at the top
of the mountain of purgatory.
Here appears Beatrice,
who is on the other side
of a river from Dante.
The river, of course,
symbolizes the expanse
of the cosmic waters, the
great river, the Milky Way that
separates Heaven and earth.
Dante faints, falls
into the river,
and emerges on the other
side with Beatrice.
Suddenly, four
angels encircle them.
Their arms stretch
over his body,
forming the shape of
a cross in a circle.
This is considered by scholars
to be a laying on of hands.
This is the Consolamentum,
especially says scholar
Maria Soresina.
Now, remember what
the Cathars believed
about the divine
spirit being divided
into two parts, one that lives
on earth, the other in Heaven.
In the "Convivio,"
Dante writes, quote,
"That blessed Beatrice who
lives in Heaven with the angels
and on earth with my soul."
This is precisely what
the Cathars believed.
Being the incarnation
of beatific love,
as her name implies, it is
Beatrice who leads Dante
into the beatific vision.
In Christian theology,
the beatific vision
is the ultimate direct
self-communication
of God to the individual person.
A person possessing
or experiencing
the beatific vision, reaches,
as a member of redeemed humanity
and the communion of
saints, perfect salvation
in its entirety in Heaven.
Soresina believes that
Beatrice represents
the part of Dante's soul
that remained in Heaven
and acts as his
guide and protector.
Remember, the
Cathars taught we all
have such an angelic soul that
remains in heaven and acts
as our guide and protector.
And it was the
Cathar Consolamentum
that reunited these two parts
with the aim of completing
our ascension through
the seven heavens.
In Manichaeism, the
awakening of the initiate
is characterized by the coming
of the Virgin of Light, leading
the way heavenward and
revealing the spiritual image
of the new man.
This is Beatrice.
In fact, in the Pathways
After Death, Mani said,
when death comes to
one of the elect,
primal man sends him
a light-shining deity
in the form of a wise guide.
And with him are three
deities with whom
they are drinking the vessel,
clothing, head cloth, crown,
and diadem of light.
There accompanies
them a virgin who
resembles the soul of
that member of the elect.
The diadem, the
crown, the robe, this
is exactly what the Essenes were
describing in their ascension
as well.
Mani later describes
the garment as radiant
and the diadem as the
jewel of sovereignty.
Mani is clearly writing
about the ancient tradition
of the beloved woman.
She is shown as a
feminine light form
and is identical in
form and function
to Avalokiteshvara, the goddess
of compassion who is shown
as a shining rainbow woman.
Now, scholars may argue that
Dante could not possibly
have been thinking
of Avalokiteshvara,
but the story has
exactly the same.
It is at this moment
that Beatrice explains
to Dante that the universe
is a hierarchy with creatures
of different degrees of
awareness and capacity
all obeying the same
divine laws as far
as they can perceive them.
And in the rainbow ring in
this depiction by Giotto
is the ringed figure or
winged figure of love.
This rainbow light body being is
the angel shut deep within us,
trapped within our
material body of flesh.
It is the pearl in the shell of
the Gnostic Hymn of the Pearl
that Thomas sought in Egypt.
What drives us to
seek it is love.
The ascension path
that leads us to her
is the path of
love, which is why
the Cathars referred to their
religion as the Way of Love.
Having completed his ascension
through seven halls or holes
in space, Dante arrives
in the Empyrean,
a region of pure light beyond
physical existence, time,
and space, where he is enveloped
in a light that transforms
his human flesh into the perfect
celestial flesh of the angels,
rendering him dressed
appropriately to see God.
Dante is practically
speechless at witnessing
the transfiguration or
metamorphosis of his body
into light.
He writes, words may not tell
of that transhuman change.
This is the first use
of the word transhuman.
And in the 24th
canto of "Paradisio,"
Saint Peter speaks
directly to Dante.
He addresses him
as Good Christian.
In Dante's time, this
could only mean one thing,
Dante was a Cathar who had
received the Consolamentum
and went through the ascension
experience of the Cathars,
of the Essenes and connected
with his life being self.
What we have seen
in this episode
is the incredible
story of the Cathars
and how they updated
the ascension code.
Many do believe that
the Cathars were in fact
reincarnations of the Essenes.
They certainly
suffered the same fate,
this time at the hands
of the Church of Rome
rather than the Roman Empire.
But the Cathar initiative is
the same as that of the Essenes,
to awaken us to our
true divine nature,
to our light being self
that resides in Heaven.
Their teachings,
their lost ideas all
reflect this concept that we
can scale a ladder to heaven.
And if indeed he
was a Cathar, Dante,
who is considered one of the
greatest geniuses of all time,
and his works of poetry,
some of the greatest
works of literature of
all time, may in fact
encode the Cathar
Consolamentum and map out
the pathway by
which all of us can
ascend into the celestial
realms and connect
with our divine selves.
[MUSIC PLAYING]